cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a deranged
expression in her eyes.

Gregor's sister rushed to his mother and put her hand on her
forehead.  Her words seemed to give Gregor's father some more
definite ideas.  He sat upright, played with his uniform cap between
the plates left by the three gentlemen after their meal, and
occasionally looked down at Gregor as he lay there immobile.

"We have to try and get rid of it", said Gregor's sister, now
speaking only to her father, as her mother was too occupied with
coughing to listen, "it'll be the death of both of you, I can see it
coming.  We can't all work as hard as we have to and then come home
to be tortured like this, we can't endure it.  I can't endure it any
more."  And she broke out so heavily in tears that they flowed down
the face of her mother, and she wiped them away with mechanical hand
movements.

"My child", said her father with sympathy and obvious understanding,
"what are we to do?"

His sister just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the helplessness
and tears that had taken hold of her, displacing her earlier
certainty.

"If he could just understand us", said his father almost as a
question; his sister shook her hand vigorously through her tears as
a sign that of that there was no question.

"If he could just understand us", repeated Gregor's father, closing
his eyes in acceptance of his sister's certainty that that was quite
impossible, "then perhaps we could come to some kind of arrangement
with him.  But as it is ..."

"It's got to go", shouted his sister, "that's the only way, Father.
You've got to get rid of the idea that that's Gregor.  We've only
harmed ourselves by believing it for so long.  How can that be
Gregor? If it were Gregor he would have seen long ago that it's not
possible for human beings to live with an animal like that and he
would have gone of his own free will.  We wouldn't have a brother
any more, then, but we could carry on with our lives and remember
him with respect.  As it is this animal is persecuting us, it's
driven out our tenants, it obviously wants to take over the whole
flat and force us to sleep on the streets.  Father, look, just
look", she suddenly screamed, "he's starting again!"   In her alarm,
which was totally beyond Gregor's comprehension, his sister even
abandoned his mother as she pushed herself vigorously out of her
chair as if more willing to sacrifice her own mother than stay
anywhere near Gregor.  She rushed over to behind her father, who had
become excited merely because she was and stood up half raising his
hands in front of Gregor's sister as if to protect her.

But Gregor had had no intention of frightening anyone, least of all
his sister.  All he had done was begin to turn round so that he
could go back into his room, although that was in itself quite
startling as his pain-wracked condition meant that turning round
required a great deal of effort and he was using his head to help
himself do it, repeatedly raising it and striking it against the
floor.  He stopped and looked round.  They seemed to have realised
his good intention and had only been alarmed briefly.  Now they all
looked at him in unhappy silence.  His mother lay in her chair with
her legs stretched out and pressed against each other, her eyes
nearly closed with exhaustion; his sister sat next to his father
with her arms around his neck.

"Maybe now they'll let me turn round", thought Gregor and went back
to work.  He could not help panting loudly with the effort and had
sometimes to stop and take a rest.  No-one was making him rush any
more, everything was left up to him.  As soon as he had finally
finished turning round he began to move straight ahead.  He was
amazed at the great distance that separated him from his room, and
could not understand how he had covered that distance in his weak
state a little while before and almost without noticing it.  He
concentrated on crawling as fast as he could and hardly noticed that
there was not a word, not any cry, from his family to distract him.
He did not turn his head until he had reached the doorway.  He did
not turn it all the way round as he felt his neck becoming stiff,
but it was nonetheless enough to see that nothing behind him had
changed, only his sister had stood up.  With his last glance he saw
that his mother had now fallen completely asleep.

He was hardly inside his room before the door was hurriedly shut,
bolted and locked.  The sudden noise behind Gregor so startled him
that his little legs collapsed under him.  It was his sister who had
been in so much of a rush.  She had been standing there waiting and
sprung forward lightly, Gregor had not heard her coming at all, and
as she turned the key in the lock she said loudly to her parents "At
last!".

"What now, then?", Gregor asked himself as he looked round in the
darkness.  He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move
at all.  This was no surprise to him, it seemed rather that being
able to actually move around on those spindly little legs until then
was unnatural.  He also felt relatively comfortable.  It is true
that his entire body was aching, but the pain seemed to be slowly
getting weaker and weaker and would finally disappear altogether.
He could already hardly feel the decayed apple in his back or the
inflamed area around it, which was entirely covered in white dust.
He thought back of his family with emotion and love.  If it was
possible, he felt that he must go away even more strongly than his
sister.  He remained in this state of empty and peaceful rumination
until he heard the clock tower strike three in the morning.  He
watched as it slowly began to get light everywhere outside the
window too.  Then, without his willing it, his head sank down
completely, and his last breath flowed weakly from his nostrils.

When the cleaner came in early in the morning - they'd often asked
her not to keep slamming the doors but with her strength and in her
hurry she still did, so that everyone in the flat knew when she'd
arrived and from then on it was impossible to sleep in peace - she
made her usual brief look in on Gregor and at first found nothing
special.  She thought he was laying there so still on purpose,
playing the martyr; she attributed all possible understanding to
him.  She happened to be holding the long broom in her hand, so she
tried to tickle Gregor with it from the doorway.  When she had no
success with that she tried to make a nuisance of herself and poked
at him a little, and only when she found she could shove him across
the floor with no resistance at all did she start to pay attention.
She soon realised what had really happened, opened her eyes wide,
whistled to herself, but did not waste time to yank open the bedroom
doors and shout loudly into the darkness of the bedrooms: "Come and
'ave a look at this, it's dead, just lying there, stone dead!"

Mr. and  Mrs. Samsa sat upright there in their marriage bed and had
to make an effort to get over the shock caused by the cleaner before
they could grasp what she was saying.  But then, each from his own
side, they hurried out of bed.  Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his
shoulders,  Mrs. Samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is
how they went into Gregor's room.  On the way they opened the door
to the living room where Grete had been sleeping since the three
gentlemen had moved in; she was fully dressed as if she had never
been asleep, and the paleness of her face seemed to confirm this.
"Dead?", asked  Mrs. Samsa, looking at the charwoman enquiringly,
even though she could have checked for herself and could have known
it even without checking.  "That's what I said",  replied the
cleaner, and to prove it she gave Gregor's body another shove with
the broom, sending it sideways across the floor.  Mrs. Samsa made a
movement as if she wanted to hold back the broom, but did not
complete it.  "Now then", said  Mr. Samsa, "let's give thanks to God
for that". He crossed himself, and the three women followed his
example.  Grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said:
"Just look how thin he was.  He didn't eat anything for so long.
The food came out again just the same as when it went in". Gregor's
body was indeed completely dried up and flat, they had not seen it
until then, but now he was not lifted up on his little legs, nor did
he do anything to make them look away.

"Grete, come with us in here for a little while", said  Mrs. Samsa
with a pained smile, and Grete followed her parents into the bedroom
but not without looking back at the body.  The cleaner shut the door
and opened the window wide.  Although it was still early in the
morning the fresh air had something of warmth mixed in with it.  It
was already the end of March, after all.

The three gentlemen stepped out of their room and looked round in
amazement for their breakfasts;  they had been forgotten about.
"Where is our breakfast?", the middle gentleman asked the cleaner
irritably.  She just put her finger on her lips and made a quick and
silent sign to the men that they might like to come into Gregor's
room.  They did so, and stood around Gregor's corpse with their
hands in the pockets of their well-worn coats. It was now quite
light in the room.

Then the door of the bedroom opened and  Mr. Samsa appeared in his
uniform with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other.  All
of them had been crying a little; Grete now and then pressed her
face against her father's arm.

"Leave my home.  Now!", said  Mr. Samsa, indicating the door and
without letting the women from him.  "What do you mean?", asked the
middle of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smiled
sweetly.  The other two held their hands behind their backs and
continually rubbed them together in gleeful anticipation of a loud
quarrel which could only end in their favour.  "I mean just what I
said", answered  Mr. Samsa, and, with his two companions, went in a
straight line towards the man.  At first, he stood there still,
looking at the ground as if the contents of his head were
rearranging themselves into new positions.  "Alright, we'll go
then", he said, and looked up at  Mr. Samsa as if he had been
suddenly overcome with humility and wanted permission again from
Mr. Samsa for his decision.  Mr. Samsa merely opened his eyes wide
and briefly nodded to him several times.  At that, and without
delay, the man actually did take long strides into the front
hallway; his two friends had stopped rubbing their hands some time
before and had been listening to what was being said.  Now they
jumped off after their friend as if taken with a sudden fear that
Mr. Samsa might go into the hallway in front of them and break the
connection with their leader.  Once there, all three took their hats
from the stand, took their sticks from the holder, bowed without a
word and left the premises.  Mr. Samsa and the two women followed
them out onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust
the men's intentions and as they leaned over the landing they saw how
the three gentlemen made slow but steady progress down the many
steps.  As they turned the corner on each floor they disappeared and
would reappear a few moments later; the further down they went, the
more that the Samsa family lost interest in them; when a butcher's
boy, proud of posture with his tray on his head, passed them on his
way up and came nearer than they were,  Mr. Samsa and the women came
away from the landing and went, as if relieved, back into the flat.

They decided the best way to make use of that day was for relaxation
and to go for a walk; not only had they earned a break from work but
they were in serious need of it.  So they sat at the table and wrote
three letters of excusal,  Mr. Samsa to his employers,  Mrs. Samsa
to her contractor and Grete to her principal.  The cleaner came in
while they were writing to tell them she was going, she'd finished
her work for that morning.  The three of them at first just nodded
without looking up from what they were writing, and it was only when
the cleaner still did not seem to want to leave that they looked up
in irritation.  "Well?", asked  Mr. Samsa.  The charwoman stood in
the doorway with a smile on her face as if she had some tremendous
good news to report, but would only do it if she was clearly asked
to.  The almost vertical little ostrich feather on her hat, which
had been a source of irritation to  Mr. Samsa all the time she had
been working for them, swayed gently in all directions.  "What is it
you want then?", asked  Mrs. Samsa, whom the cleaner had the most
respect for.  "Yes", she answered, and broke into a friendly laugh
that made her unable to speak straight away, "well then, that thing
in there, you needn't worry about how you're going to get rid of it.
 That's all been sorted out."   Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down over
their letters as if intent on continuing with what they were
writing;  Mr. Samsa saw that the cleaner wanted to start describing
everything in detail but, with outstretched hand, he made it quite
clear that she was not to.  So, as she was prevented from telling
them all about it, she suddenly remembered what a hurry she was in
and, clearly peeved, called out "Cheerio then, everyone", turned
round sharply and left, slamming the door terribly as she went.

"Tonight she gets sacked", said  Mr. Samsa, but he received no reply
from either his wife or his daughter as the charwoman seemed to have
destroyed the peace they had only just gained.  They got up and went
over to the window where they remained with their arms around each
other.  Mr. Samsa twisted round in his chair to look at them and sat
there watching for a while.  Then he called out: "Come here, then.
Let's forget about all that old stuff, shall we.  Come and give me a
bit of attention". The two women immediately did as he said,
hurrying over to him where they kissed him and hugged him and then
they quickly finished their letters.

After that, the three of them left the flat together, which was
something they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the
open country outside the town.  They had the tram, filled with warm
sunshine, all to themselves.  Leant back comfortably on their seats,
they discussed their prospects and found that on closer examination
they were not at all bad - until then they had never asked each
other about their work but all three had jobs which were very good
and held particularly good promise for the future.  The greatest
improvement for the time being, of course, would be achieved quite
easily by moving house; what they needed now was a flat that was
smaller and cheaper than the current one which had been chosen by
Gregor, one that was in a better location and, most of all, more
practical.  All the time, Grete was becoming livelier.  With all the
worry they had been having of late her cheeks had become pale, but,
while they were talking,  Mr. and  Mrs. Samsa were struck, almost
simultaneously, with the thought of how their daughter was
blossoming into a well built and beautiful young lady.  They became
quieter.  Just from each other's glance and almost without knowing
it they agreed that it would soon be time to find a good man for
her.  And, as if in confirmation of their new dreams and good
intentions, as soon as they reached their destination Grete was the
first to get up and stretch out her young body.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Metamorphosis, by Franz Kafka
Translated by David Wyllie.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK METAMORPHOSIS ***

***** This file should be named 5200.txt or 5200.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/5/2/0/5200/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
